In the near future, crop blight has caused civilization to regress into a failing agrarian society. Former NASA pilot Cooper (Matthew McConaughey) runs a farm with his family. Murphy (Mackenzie Foy), Cooper's 10-year-old daughter, believes her room is haunted by a poltergeist trying to communicate with her. They come across a malfunctioning Indian unmanned aerial vehicle that they salvage for spare parts. They soon discover that Murphy's "ghost" is an unknown intelligence sending coded messages using gravitational waves, leaving binary coordinates in the dust that direct them to a secret NASA installation led by Professor John Brand (Michael Caine). Brand reveals that a wormhole, apparently created by an alien intelligence, has opened near Saturn and leads to new planets in another galaxy that may offer hope for survival. NASA's "Lazarus missions" have identified three potentially habitable worlds orbiting a supermassive black hole named Gargantua: Miller, Edmunds, and Mann, named after the astronauts who surveyed them. Brand recruits Cooper to pilot the spacecraft Endurance to recover the astronauts' data; if one of the planets is habitable, humanity will follow on space stations. Cooper's departure devastates Murphy, and they part on bad terms.

On Endurance, Cooper joins Brand's daughter, biotechnologist Amelia (Anne Hathaway); scientists Romilly (David Gyasi) and Doyle (Wes Bentley); and robots TARS and CASE. They travel to Saturn and enter the wormhole, heading to Miller, but they discover that the planet is so close to Gargantua that it experiences severe gravitational time dilation; each hour on the surface is seven years on Earth. A team descends to the planet, which proves inhospitable as it is covered by a shallow ocean roiled by enormous tidal waves. As Amelia attempts to recover Miller's data, a wave hits, killing Doyle and delaying the shuttle's departure. When the others return to Endurance, 23 years have passed.

On Earth, the adult Murphy (Jessica Chastain) is now a NASA scientist helping Brand with an equation that will enable NASA to launch the space stations via gravity. With his last breath, Brand admits he already solved the problem and determined the project is impossible. He concealed his findings to keep hope alive and put his faith in "Plan B": using frozen embryos aboard the Endurance to start humanity anew. However, Murphy concludes that Brand's equation could work with additional data from a black hole's singularity.

Low on fuel, Endurance can only visit one more planet before returning to Earth. After a tense vote, the team selects Mann's planet, as Mann is still transmitting. However, they discover it is perpetually cold, covered with icy glaciers, and inhospitable. Mann (Matt Damon), who always knew Plan B was the mission's true goal, faked data about his planet's viability so Endurance would rescue him. Mann breaks Cooper's spacesuit visor and leaves him to die, and flees to Endurance on a shuttle; Romilly is killed by a bomb Mann set to protect his secret. Amelia rescues Cooper using the other cargo shuttle, and they arrive at Endurance in time to witness Mann docking improperly. The airlock explodes, killing Mann and causing serious damage, but Cooper uses the cargo shuttle to get Endurance under control.

Nearly out of fuel, Cooper and Amelia plan to slingshot Endurance around Gargantua on a course toward Edmunds on the other side of the black hole while many years will pass on Earth. TARS and Cooper detach their shuttles into the black hole, sacrificing themselves to collect data on the singularity and to propel Amelia and CASE by dropping the ship's mass. They emerge in an extra-dimensional location called "The Tesseract", where time appears as a spatial dimension and portals show glimpses of Murphy's childhood bedroom at various times. Cooper realizes that the wormhole's creators are future humans transcending time and space, who have constructed the tesseract so he can communicate with Murphy as her "ghost" and save humanity. Using gravitational waves, Cooper encodes TARS's data on the singularity into the adult Murphy's watch, allowing her to solve Brand's equation and launch the space stations.

Once the data is transmitted, the tesseract dissolves and Cooper finds himself traveling through the wormhole, coming into orbit around Saturn. He awakens aboard a NASA space station and reunites with the now elderly Murphy (Ellen Burstyn), who has led humanity's exodus. Satisfied that Cooper has kept his promise to one day come back, Murphy convinces Cooper to search for Amelia, who is implementing Plan B with CASE on Edmunds' desert, hospitable planet. Cooper and TARS, who was also rescued from space, steal a NASA shuttle to travel to Edmunds' Planet.